### Changelog
The high level changelog is available at http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/lamport/tla/toolbox.html#release. The [1.6.1 milestone](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A1.6.1+is%3Aclosed) lists all completed issues.


### Additional noteworthy changes

#### TLC
* Annotation-based loading of TLC module overrides for TLA+ operators. eb42f9ed462782c1577ec7433a993b770959437e
* More powerful TLC module overrides that can programmatically manipulate a successor state. bb64cfd921c2e8846f47a5818d85cd0e8f2aa2c5
* Write snapshots of state graph in dot/gv format after every new state. 305f38b1b7f68a0f4885615e7a148c3bf83aad95
* A number of additions pertaining to working with trace expressions have been added to the command line tool `tlc2.TLC` and a new peer command line tool `tlc2.TraceExplorer` - see [GitHub Issue 393](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues/393) for an overview and background. Salient points include:
 * Running TLC with both the `-generateSpecTE` flag will enable 'tool mode' output and, in the event that the model check encounters errors, generate a `SpecTE.tla` and `SpecTE.cfg` file pair that captures
 the state trace reconstruction in an Init-Next relation spec.
   * This `SpecTE.tla` will, by default, be a monolithic file, prefaced by the tool output, followed a the `SpecTE` MODULE definition which includes all extended non-StandardModule TLA code as well.
     * To prevent the monolith inclusion of dependent TLA code, specify `nomonolith` after the `-generateSpecTE`
 * Running TLC with `-h` now displays a usage page reminiscent of a standard man page.
 * TraceExplorer exposes four capabilities:
   * running the TraceExplorer with no spec name puts the TraceExplorer into a mode to receive input via stdin (e.g in order to pipe tool-mode output from TLC)
   * pretty-printing: given an existing tool-mode output from a previous model check run (or piping in such output), pretty-printing will display an output stack to the terminal in basically the same format as one would see in the Toolbox's Error Viewer
   * SpecTE generation: given an existing tool-mode output from a previous model check run (or piping in such output), create a `SpecTE.tla` and `SpecTE.cfg` file pair - this **will not** be a monolithic version.
   * Expression exploration: given an existing tool-mode output from a previous model check run (or piping in such output), and file of expressions, one per line:
     * create a `SpecTE.tla` and `SpecTE.cfg` file pair if one doesn't exist
     * then create a `TE.tla` and `TE.cfg` file pair which extends SpecTE and contains appropriate conjunctions featuring the expressions
     * then run model checking on this TE spec, both creating a `TE.out` and dumping the tool-mode output to stdout
     * then do a courtesy pretty-print of the output. Pretty-printing in this scenario will ANSI-bold the expressions and their evaluated values
   * Single expression exploration: as a sort of REPL-adjacent, any single TLA+ expression can be evaluated.
   * running `tlc2.TraceExplorer` with no arguments, or `-h` will display helpful usage verbiage

#### Toolbox

##### Preferences
* The Toolbox now supports selecting a Dark theme via `General → Appearance`.
* The "Show Evaluate Constant Expression in its own tab" preference has been moved from `TLA+ Preferences → TLC Model Checker` to `TLA+ Preferences → Model Editor`.
* The `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS` preference subtree has been altered:
 * the previous page at `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS` is now at `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS → Color Predicates`.
 * The page previously at `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS → Additional Preferences` is now renamed to `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS → Other Preferences`.
 * Non-color-predicate-related preferences from `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS → Additional Preferences` have been moved into `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS`.
 * `TLA+ Preferences → TLAPS` now also features the ability to set a file system location for the `tlapm` executable should the Toolbox not be able to find it.
* On macOS, you can now set the preference to have the operating system open PDFs with your default PDF viewer via `TLA+ Preferences → PDF Viewer`.

##### Spec Editor
* The spec editor now allows the collapsing of block comments, PlusCal code, and the TLA+ translation of PlusCal code. The first line of each of these types of runs should feature a minus icon in the line number gutter. Clicking on this icon will collapse the run; while in a collapsed state, holding the mouse over the, now: plus, icon will show the collapsed text as a tooltip.
 * Please review the help page for the PlusCal translator in the Toolbox for guidance
 as to how the comment block surround the PlusCal algorithm should be written.
 * The preferences pane found at `TLA+ Preferences → Module Editor` allows for the setting of the default folding preferences (e.g 'always fold block comments when opening a specification in the editor.')
* The spec editor also allows the collapsing of a contiguous run of two or more single line comments (where a single line comment is defined as a line starting with 0 or more spaces and or tabs, followed by a `\*`)
* The translation of PlusCal code now generates a checksum of this code and the resulting TLA+ code; this checksum is calculated again when a model is executed and if it has changed, either a warning dialog will be displayed (if executed via the Toolbox) or a log warning will be emitted (if TLC is executed on the command line.)
 * If you make a change to the generated TLA+ code, but do not want to be warned by the Toolbox of the divergence, you can delete only the TLA checksum (e.g `\** END TRANSLATION TLA-9b285153d0358878d62b88c9d4a6a047` → `\** END TRANSLATION`.) You will still be warned if the PlusCal code content is found to have changed without re-translating.
* If attempting to generate a PDF of a spec fails because the `pdflatex` executable could not be found, a more informative warning dialog is now displayed for the user, including a way to directly open the Toolbox preference page specifying executable location.
* The ability to user the prover against a spec will now be disabled while the spec fails to be successfully parsed.

##### Model Editor
* The style of the display of definitions in the "Definition Override" section in the Spec Options tab can be defined in the `TLA+ Preferences → Model Editor` preferences. There are two styles currently; given a `Definition` from a `Module Name` referenced in the primary spec like `InstanceName == INSTANCE ModuleName WITH ...`, then the two available styles are:
 * `Definition [Module Name]`
 * `InstanceName!Definition`
* The Initial predicate / Next-state text areas were no longer interpreting a TAB as 'advance focus' due to a regression introduced when we moved to multi-line support for these text areas in 1.6.0. Both text areas now interpret a TAB as a focus advance; a TAB in the 'Init:' text area moves focus to the 'Next:' text area and a TAB in that text area advances the focus to the 'What is the model?' section.
* New models now open a Model Editor instance with only a single tab - the Model Overview page. Running the model will open the Results tab, or should the user want to work immediately with evaluating constant expressions, there is a link at the bottom of the Model Overview page which will open the Results tab (as well as the Constant Expressions tab should the user have configured their preferences to show this in its own tab.)
* Warn when checking liveness under action or state constraints (see [Specifying Systems](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/book.html) section 14.3.5 on page 247 for details).

##### Spec Explorer
* Right-clicking on model snapshots was incorrectly presenting the choice to rename the snapshot; this has been corrected.
* Renaming specifications now correctly cleans up after itself [and should no longer prevent models from being opened.](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues/339)
* Previously, opening a spec while the current spec had a dirty editor open, and to which the user chose to `Cancel` the offer to save the dirtied editor, resulted in the Toolbox continuing to open the new spec. This has been fixed - the opening process is halted and the original spec remains open.
* Deleting a spec which has a currently dirty editor open for it, in which the user Cancel-s out of the dialog warning that the user is closing a dirty editor and asking whether they want to Don't Save, or Cancel, or Save, was continuing with the deletion of the spec. [It now stops the deletion process.](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues/375)

##### Trace Explorer
* The Error-Trace can now be filtered to omit one or more variables and/or expressions. Clicking on the filter icon, when filtering is not on, will display a dialog allowing the user to select from the set of variables and expressions found in the trace; alternatively, the user may ALT-click on a variable or expression in the Error-Trace tree view which will then omit that variable or expression. ([Screencast](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/master/general/docs/changelogs/screencasts/error-trace-filtering.gif))
 * Also provided in the Error-Trace filtering dialog is the ability to hide variables whose values have not changed. For a variable that has changed at sometime during the trace, it may be displayed in either only the frames in which its value has changed, or in every frame of the trace. ([Screencast](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/master/general/docs/changelogs/screencasts/show_hide_changed_variables.gif))
 * While filtering is enabled, a checkbox will be displayed above the variable value viewing text area allowing this area to display all the variables, or only the filtered variables, when a state is selected in the Error-Trace tree.
* [Allow Trace-Explorer to extend additional TLA+ modules](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues/342) ([Screencast](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/master/general/docs/changelogs/screencasts/ExtendModulesForTraceExplorer.gif))
* Export Error-Trace to system's clipboard ([Screencast](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/master/general/docs/changelogs/screencasts/ExportErrorTrace.gif))
* Model checking can now be started using any given frame shown in the Error-Trace. Right-clicking on any location row will display a context menu giving the user the opportunity to run the model checking starting at that state. ([Screencast](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/master/general/docs/changelogs/screencasts/model_check_from_error_trace_state.gif))

### Running checking in Ad Hoc mode
* We have ended support for launching workers via JNLP; more information can be found on the master server's web page when running in this mode (e.g http://localhost:10996)

### A note to macOS users
Startup on macOS version 10.14 (Mojave) will fail with "TLA+ Toolbox can't be opened because Apple cannot check it for malicious software.".  Please make sure to follow the instructions outlined in [GitHub issue #320](https://github.com/tlaplus/tlaplus/issues/320) to address this problem.

### Checksums
sha1sum|file
------------ | -------------
